doc: openstack/IPI - Provider Networks (#4646)
openshift/installer: docs/user/openstack/provider_networks.md

# Provider Networks

## Table of Contents
- [Provider Networks](#provider-networks)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Common prerequisites](#common-prerequisites)
  - [Considerations when creating provider networks](#considerations-when-creating-provider-networks)
  - [Deploying cluster with primary interface on a provider network with IPI](#deploying-cluster-with-primary-interface-on-a-provider-network-with-ipi)
  - [Known issues](#known-issues)

## Introduction

Provider networks map directly to an existing physical network in the data center.
Useful network types in this category include flat (untagged), VLAN (802.1Q tagged) and VXLAN. 
OpenShift clusters can be deployed on provider networks, so the installer won't need to create
tenant networks nor floating IPs.
More information can be found about provider networks terminology [here][1].

## Common prerequisites

* [Neutron service][2] is enabled and accessible through the [OpenStack Networking API][3].

> * Neutron should be configured with the [port_security][4] extension so the installer can

Reviewer: The neutron doc suggests we need the `port-security` and `allowed-address-pairs` extensions.

Author: ack, I'll add it.

>   add the allowed_address_pairs attribute to ports.

Reviewer: Use backticks for attributes names.
```suggestion
  add the `allowed_address_pairs` attribute to ports.
```

Example of network types include flat (untagged), VLAN (802.1Q tagged) and VXLAN. 
OpenShift clusters that are installed on provider networks do not require tenant networks or floating IP addresses (FIPs).
Therefore, the OpenShift installer does not create these resources during installation.
More information can be found about provider networks terminology [here][1].

Here is a basic architecture of one OCP cluster running on a provider network and another one
on a tenant network:

![OCP on a provider network](provider-network.png)

## Prerequisites

* The [Neutron service][2] is enabled and accessible through the [OpenStack Networking API][3].
* The Neutroni service is configured with the [port-security and allowed-address-pairs][4] extensions so the installer can
  add the `allowed_address_pairs` attribute to ports.

## Considerations when creating provider networks

* The project that you use to install OpenShift must own the provider network and subnet.

    The provider network and subnet must be owned by the project that is used to install OpenShift instead of `admin`.
    If they are not, Terraform fails while creating ports. 

>     It is important that the provider network and subnet are owned by the same project that will be used

Author: I just tested and this is indeed only the network only, I'll update it.

    it'll cause Terraform to fail creating the ports.

    Example where our project name is `openshift`:

        openstack network create --project openshift (...)
        openstack subnet create --project openshift (...)

    More information can be found about how to create provider networks [here][5].

* The Metadata IP has to be routed so the bootstrap nodes can fetch the required information
  to provision the node and the cluster. The Neutron DHCP server also has to be enabled.

  This can be achieved by specifying a route when creating the subnet:

        openstack subnet create --dhcp --host-route destination=169.254.169.254/32,gateway=$ROUTER_IP" (...)

  (where the gateway is the IP of the router in charge of routing the traffic of the Provider Network).

**Note:** This should not apply to OVN because Metadata is completely distributed across OpenStack compute nodes
          and served from the ovnmeta-xxxxx-xxxx namespace. Therefore, there is nothing to do.

* When deployment baremetal workers on provider networks with OVN, the subnet should be created with DHCP enabled

>   and the Neutron DHCP agent should be deployed and running. There is an [ongoing effort][6] to remove that

Reviewer: Hmm, the bz points to effort about removing the need for dhcp agent with ovn for BM workers. I'm not sure it applies to our case here. What is providing DHCP on the subnet otherwise?

Author: i'll remove that section for now and improve later if needed.

More information can be found about provider networks terminology [here][1].

Here is a basic architecture of one OCP cluster running on a provider network and another one
on a tenant network:

![OCP on a provider network](provider-network.png)

## Prerequisites

* The [Neutron service][2] is enabled and accessible through the [OpenStack Networking API][3].
* The Neutron service is configured with the [port-security and allowed-address-pairs][4] extensions so the installer can
  add the `allowed_address_pairs` attribute to ports.

## Considerations when creating provider networks

* The provider network has to be shared with other tenants, otherwise Nova won't be able to request ports on that external
  network. For more details, see [BZ#1933047][5].

        openstack network create --share (...)

  To secure that network, it is advised to create [RBAC][6] rules so the network can be only usable by a specific project.

* The project that you use to install OpenShift must own the provider network.

    The provider network and the subnet must be owned by the project that is used to install OpenShift instead of `admin`.

>     If they are not, Terraform fails while creating ports. 

Reviewer 2: If they run the installer from the admin user, this should work still, right? It's not the user experience we want, but maybe we should inform the user that its a permission issue and not impossible: "If the are not, you will have to run the installer from the admin user to create ports on the network."

    It is important that the provider network and the subnet are owned by the same project that will be used
    to install OpenShift (from the clouds.yaml) and we don't want them to be owned by `admin` otherwise
    it'll cause Terraform to fail creating the ports.

    Example commands to create a network and subnet for a project that is named `openshift`:

        openstack network create --project openshift (...)
        openstack subnet create --project openshift (...)

    More information can be found about how to create provider networks [here][7].

* You'll have to make sure that the provider network can reach
  the Metadata IP (169.254.169.254) which, depending on the OpenStack SDN and how Neutron
  is configured (e.g. DHCP servers provide metadata network routes) might involve
  to provide the route when creating the subnet:

    openstack subnet create --dhcp --host-route destination=169.254.169.254/32,gateway=$ROUTER_IP" (...)

**Note:** We're working on removing the nova-metadata requirement but for now it is strongly required to be
          enabled in the cloud and reachable from the provider network.

> eploying cluster with primary interface on a provider network with IPI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
deploying cluster with primary interface on a provider network with IPI
```

  - [Deploying cluster with primary interface on a provider network with IPI](#deploying-cluster-with-primary-interface-on-a-provider-network-with-ipi)
  - [Known issues](#known-issues)

## Introduction

Provider networks map directly to an existing physical network in the data center.
Useful network types in this category include flat (untagged), VLAN (802.1Q tagged) and VXLAN. 
OpenShift clusters can be deployed on provider networks, so the installer won't need to create
tenant networks nor floating IPs.
More information can be found about provider networks terminology [here][1].

Here is a basic architecture of one OCP cluster running on a provider network and another one
on a tenant network:

![OCP on a provider network](provider-network.png)

## Common prerequisites

* [Neutron service][2] is enabled and accessible through the [OpenStack Networking API][3].
* Neutron should be configured with the [port_security][4] extension so the installer can
  add the allowed_address_pairs attribute to ports.
* The Provider Network has to be created by the administrator with specific configuration (see the next section).

> * The Metadata IP (169.254.269.254) has to be routed for the provider network.

Reviewer: I believe we also need a DHCP server on the subnet.

    More information can be found about how to create provider networks [here][5].

* The Metadata IP has to be routed so the bootstrap nodes can fetch the required information
  to provision the node and the cluster.

  This can be achieved by specifying a route when creating the subnet:

        openstack subnet create --host-route destination=169.254.169.254/32,gateway=$ROUTER_IP" (...)

  (where the gateway is the IP of the router in charge of routing the traffic of the Provider Network).

**Note:** This should not apply to OVN because Metadata is completely distributed across OpenStack compute nodes
          and served from the ovnmeta-xxxxx-xxxx namespace. Therefore, there is nothing to do.

* When deployment baremetal workers on provider networks with OVN, the subnet should be created with DHCP enabled
  and the Neutron DHCP agent should be deployed and running. There is an [ongoing effort][6] to remove that
  dependency.

        openstack subnet create --dhcp

## Deploying cluster with primary interface on a provider network with IPI

- Requirements: make sure all requirements documented previously have been met.

- Create install-config.yaml:

>     - Set `platform.openstack.apiVIP` to the IP address for the API VIP.

Reviewer: We should perhaps say somewhere that `platform.openstack.apiVIP` and  `platform.openstack.ingressVIP` both need to be an unnassigned IP address on the `networking.machineNetwork.cidr`.

# Provider Networks

## Table of Contents
- [Provider Networks](#provider-networks)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Common prerequisites](#common-prerequisites)
  - [Considerations when creating provider networks](#considerations-when-creating-provider-networks)
  - [Deploying cluster with primary interface on a provider network with IPI](#deploying-cluster-with-primary-interface-on-a-provider-network-with-ipi)
  - [Known issues](#known-issues)

## Introduction

> Provider networks map directly to an existing physical network in a data center.

Reviewer 3: @EmilienM Is this the definition of a provider network, or just the typical way a provider network is configured?

Author: it's the popular definition of it in OpenStack world.

> Example of network types in this category include flat (untagged), VLAN (802.1Q tagged) and VXLAN. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Network types in this category include flat (untagged), VLAN (802.1Q tagged), and VXLAN. 
```

Can we be clearer about what "this category" is? It reads ambiguously to me whether you're saying that flat, VLAN, and VXLAN are provider networks or physical networks in the current construction.

OpenShift clusters can be deployed on provider networks, so the installer won't need to create
tenant networks nor floating IPs.
More information can be found about provider networks terminology [here][1].

Here is a basic architecture of one OCP cluster running on a provider network and another one
on a tenant network:

![OCP on a provider network](provider-network.png)

## Prerequisites

* The [Neutron service][2] is enabled and accessible through the [OpenStack Networking API][3].

> * The Neutroni service is configured with the [port-security and allowed-address-pairs][4] extensions so the installer can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The Neutron service is configured with the [port-security and allowed-address-pairs][4] extensions so the installer can
```

  add the `allowed_address_pairs` attribute to ports.

## Considerations when creating provider networks

> * The same project that you use to install OpenShift must own the provider network and subnet.

Reviewer 3: Hm. Might retweak to:

"The project that you use to install OpenShift must own the provider network and subnet."

Sorry!

>     It is important that the provider network and subnet are owned by the same project that will be used
>     to install OpenShift (from the clouds.yaml) and we don't want them to be owned by `admin` otherwise
>     it'll cause Terraform to fail creating the ports.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The provider network and subnet must be owned by the project that is used to install OpenShift instead of `admin`.
If they are not, Terraform fails while creating ports. 
//The provider network and subnet are indicated in the clouds.yaml file.
```

Not sure if that commented part is right or not.

>     Example where our project name is `openshift`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Example commands to create a network and subnet for a project that is named `openshift`:
```

        openstack network create --project openshift (...)
        openstack subnet create --project openshift (...)

    More information can be found about how to create provider networks [here][5].

* The Metadata IP has to be routed so the bootstrap nodes can fetch the required information
  to provision the node and the cluster. The Neutron DHCP server also has to be enabled.

  This can be achieved by specifying a route when creating the subnet:

        openstack subnet create --dhcp --host-route destination=169.254.169.254/32,gateway=$ROUTER_IP" (...)

  (where the gateway is the IP of the router in charge of routing the traffic of the Provider Network).

> **Note:** This should not apply to OVN because Metadata is completely distributed across OpenStack compute nodes

Reviewer 3: Should not or does not?

Author: should not

          and served from the ovnmeta-xxxxx-xxxx namespace. Therefore, there is nothing to do.

* When deployment baremetal workers on provider networks with OVN, the subnet should be created with DHCP enabled
  and the Neutron DHCP agent should be deployed and running. There is an [ongoing effort][6] to remove that
  dependency.

        openstack subnet create --dhcp

## Deploying cluster with primary interface on a provider network with IPI

- Considerations: make sure all prerequisites documented previously have been met.

- Create install-config.yaml:

    - Set `platform.openstack.apiVIP` to the IP address for the API VIP.
    - Set `platform.openstack.ingressVIP` to the IP address for the Ingress VIP.
    - Set `platform.openstack.machinesSubnet` to the subnet ID of the provider network subnet.
    - Set `networking.machineNetwork.cidr` to the CIDR of the provider network subnet.

**Note:**

> `platform.openstack.apiVIP` and `platform.openstack.ingressVIP` both need to be an unnassigned IP

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`platform.openstack.apiVIP` and `platform.openstack.ingressVIP` both need to be an unassigned IP
```

address on the `networking.machineNetwork.cidr`.

    Example:

        (...)
        platform:
          openstack:
            apiVIP: <IP address in the provider network reserved for the API VIP>
            ingressVIP: <IP address in the provider network reserved for the Ingress VIP>
            machinesSubnet: <provider network subnet ID>
            (...)
        networking:
          machineNetwork:
          - cidr: <provider network subnet CIDR>

> - Run the openshift installer:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Run the OpenShiftinstaller:
```

      ./openshift-install create cluster --log-level debug

> - wait for the installer to complete.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Wait for the installer to complete.
```

## Known issues

> * Terraform fails to create ports with permissions issue, see requirements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If Terraform fails to create ports with a permissions issue, see requirements.
```
Link?

> * Metadata can't be reached (routing issue), see requirements documented earlier.

Reviewer 3: *
```suggestion
* If the metadata service can't be reached due to a routing failure, see the requirements documented earlier.
```
Link?

> * DHCP traffic is not supported on provider networks using OVN when doing baremetal, see

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* DHCP traffic is not supported on provider networks using OVN when doing baremetal, see
```

I'm not sure of the value of these troubleshooting bullets, yet. We don't have example messages for a quick ctrl+F, and the only suggested course of action is to check the prereqs.

# Provider Networks

## Table of Contents
- [Provider Networks](#provider-networks)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Common prerequisites](#common-prerequisites)
  - [Considerations when creating provider networks](#considerations-when-creating-provider-networks)
  - [Deploying cluster with primary interface on a provider network with IPI](#deploying-cluster-with-primary-interface-on-a-provider-network-with-ipi)
  - [Known issues](#known-issues)

## Introduction

> Provider networks map directly to an existing physical network in the data center.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Provider networks map directly to an existing physical network in a data center.
```

Author: :+1:

> Useful network types in this category include flat (untagged), VLAN (802.1Q tagged) and VXLAN. 

Reviewer 3: "Useful" or something like "example?"

Author: something like "example"

OpenShift clusters can be deployed on provider networks, so the installer won't need to create

> tenant networks nor floating IPs.

Reviewer 3: Is this always the case? 

Order seems a bit backward. Is it accurate to say something like:

> OpenShift clusters that are installed on provider networks do not require tenant networks or floating IP addresses (FIPs). Therefore, the OpenShift installer does not create these things during installation.

Not saying that's gold, but looking for clarification. :)

Author: :+1:

More information can be found about provider networks terminology [here][1].

Here is a basic architecture of one OCP cluster running on a provider network and another one
on a tenant network:

> ![OCP on a provider network](provider-network.png)

Reviewer 3: I can take a whack at improving the alt text here in my PR.

Author: :+1:

> ## Common prerequisites

Reviewer 3: Not sure if "Common" is used commonly enough in this or related repos to work here. What are you trying to convey? 

Are there different configuration paths? 

If not:

```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

Author: :+1:

> * [Neutron service][2] is enabled and accessible through the [OpenStack Networking API][3].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The [Neutron service][2] is enabled and accessible through the [OpenStack Networking API][3].
```

Author: :+1:

> * Neutron should be configured with the [port-security and allowed-address-pairs][4] extensions so the installer can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The Neutron service is configured with the [port-security and allowed-address-pairs][4] extensions so the installer can
```

Author: :+1:

  add the `allowed_address_pairs` attribute to ports.

> * The Provider Network has to be created by the administrator with specific configuration (see the next section).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The provider network is created by the administrator with specific configuration (see the next section).
```

If there are a number of checks to make, I'd probably remove this bullet and turn the next section into a network verification and configuration section. Otherwise, you're asking the reader to skip past the end of the prereqs.

Author: :+1: for a new section

> * The Metadata IP (169.254.269.254) has to be routed for the provider network and we need to enable the DHCP server
>   for the subnet (see the next section).

Reviewer 3: Metadata service?

Not sure about this second clause, but:

```suggestion
* The metadata service IP address (169.254.269.254) is routed for the provider network.
* A DHCP server is enabled for the subnet that the metadata service is on.
```

Author: :+1:

## Considerations when creating provider networks

* The provider network has to be owned by the project ID used to bootstrap the OCP cluster.

>     It is important that the provider network and subnet are owned by the same project that will be used

Reviewer 3: This is a good opportunity to use "must," I think. 

"The same project that you use to install OpenShift must own the provider network and subnet."

Or something like that.

        openstack subnet create --project openshift (...)

    More information can be found about how to create provider networks [here][5].

* The Metadata IP has to be routed so the bootstrap nodes can fetch the required information
  to provision the node and the cluster. The Neutron DHCP server also has to be enabled.

  This can be achieved by specifying a route when creating the subnet:

        openstack subnet create --dhcp --host-route destination=169.254.169.254/32,gateway=$ROUTER_IP" (...)

  (where the gateway is the IP of the router in charge of routing the traffic of the Provider Network).

**Note:** This should not apply to OVN because Metadata is completely distributed across OpenStack compute nodes
          and served from the ovnmeta-xxxxx-xxxx namespace. Therefore, there is nothing to do.

* When deployment baremetal workers on provider networks with OVN, the subnet should be created with DHCP enabled
  and the Neutron DHCP agent should be deployed and running. There is an [ongoing effort][6] to remove that
  dependency.

        openstack subnet create --dhcp

## Deploying cluster with primary interface on a provider network with IPI

> - Requirements: make sure all requirements documented previously have been met.

Reviewer 3: Requirements or prerequisites? Considerations + prerequisites?

Author: I'll let you pick any. Thanks
